Recently I have received a beautiful EeePC 901, as a wedding present.
The main user of this little wonder will be my wife, since `I already
have a MacBook`_, but I plan to use it during our travels. Actually
I am writing these notes on the eeePC while we are in train, coming back to home
after visiting my folks 

I spent a lot of time thinking about which model to buy: I wanted one
since the 8.9 inches models came out a few months ago, but I was waiting
for the new 10.2 inches model. Unfortunately, I have spent a couple of
days googling, but I could not find a Linux model with the 10.2''
display here in Italy and I did not want to wait, nor to buy a Windows
one. I have `mentioned elsewhere`_ that I am really tired of buying
laptops just to wipe out their operating system: for the first time
the EeePC allows me to buy a Linux laptop and I want to take full
advantage of this opportunity.

Since the main user of this machine will be my wife,
therefore I do not plan to install anything nontrivial on it, and
I would be happy to keep the default Xandros distribution if it
works fine. I have seen many advanced users criticizing Xandros,
and probably they are right - if I was the main user, I 
would probably install Ubuntu since it is my main operating system
at work - but it must say that it is really easy to use for
computer illiterate people.

I bought the machine, I installed the battery without even looking at the
manual, I powered on, and in seconds I was already surfing the Net with
my wireless network. It was the first time in my life I had a similar
experience with a Linux machine, and it was really heart warming ;)

Today I tried to connect to a traditional (i.e. wirefull) LAN at my 
parents home, and it also
worked perfectly well at the first attempt without requiring any
configuration at all.
Audio, video, recognition of USB devices and an external monitor
worked out of the box (actually I had to run a setup script to
view certain .avi files, but the script was already installed on
my machine and it was easy to find its existence with a bit of
googling) and this is also something I was not used too.

There is a set of very nice applications bundled with the netbook:
in particular the StarOffice productivity suite. My wife has the
need of a Word-like editor and she was happy with the StarOffice
one.

There is a self-update system provided by Xandros, which however does
not look to be working perfectly well (it seems it cannot install
some upgrades by Xandros itself ?) however I do not care much
about that for the moment: we will see if it becomes a problem.
The first day I used it,  couple of times the system became irresponsive 
and I had to reboot it, but now it seems to work fine. The media player
is very fluid and the audio pretty much decent for a machine this size
and price.

The things that worried me the most before bying the EeePC where
the screen size and the keyboard size. The screen is very bright and
readable: however it is tiring to look at it for many hours, so
I will recommend my wife to connect thee EeePC to our external monitor
if she has a lot of work to do. The keyboard is also very small and
at the beginning it was difficult to write with it: I must say however
that after a few hours of typing I am becoming proficient with it.
Still, a bigger keyboard would be a nice thing to have.

For this reason I have wondered a lot about buying a 904H model, which
has a larger keyboard (but a display of the same size): this model
is available with Linux, has a 160 GB traditional hard disk 
it is also much cheaper than the 901. Still, at the end, I decided
to buy the 901, which features an Atom processor and 7+ hours
battery life. For my wife and me battery life is extremely important;
moreover she wanted a very light machine and the 901 model weights 1.1 Kg, whereas
the 904 model weights 1.45 Kg. The 901 is also smaller and fits in her small
bag: for a men this may be less important and you may want to buy the 10.20''
inches model instead, for just a few bucks more. 

I was not sure about the
solid state disk vs the traditional hard disk: at the same price the
difference is between 20 GB of space vs 160GB of space, so initially
I thought a traditional hard would have been a better choice.
However, now that I have EeePC in hand I have changed my mind:
the machine is so small that it is very easy to drop it accidentally
and a solid state disk is much safer than a traditional hard disk.
I feel much better having a solid state disk now.
Moreover, I have already a couple of external hard disks, so disk
real estate is not an issue for me.

How fast is the EeePC?